And we are now taping and we're talking, how do you pronounce your name?
Is it Hahnemann?
Hahnemann.
Hahnemann, okay.
Okay, good.
Can I have a chance to make, to correct a couple misleading remarks?
Sure.
I made one we talked on May 16th.
Let's also just assume that we're starting from scratch right now.
Well, because right now we're recording for the first time, so I'm just going to assume that we didn't even talk the last time, but go ahead, by all means.
Well, it's just that when I spoke of selling my collection to University of Maryland, I didn't want to give any impression that I'm talking about first edition, because the only possibly rare item was Jasper Woods, that publication here of the Spanish Earth, and it was just my sixth
I kept one shelf, six shelves of books.
And then another thing, when I mentioned about my job as index supervisor at McGraw-Hill, I don't know if I sounded like I prepared the indexes.
What I did, not all I did, it was a big job.
What I did was I edited the author's indexes for college division.
I see.
TMRB, professional and reference books, and then made assignments for freelance indexes.
McGraw-Hill's policy was that an author could always ask to have a freelancer do it, but if they submitted anything, I mean, they could submit six or eight pages for an index, and then, you know, I had to really build it to make it an adequate index.
And, of course, sometimes then there would be hundreds and hundreds of pages, and then they would need editing some style.
I see.
Well, why don't we just start from the beginning, if it's okay with you, and then we'll just get to that material.
No, but I've got two other points.
In Tom's letter, my sister moved to New York three years after me.
She rented her house and planned to stay for a year, and she stayed 19 years.
And she thought Tom greatly overdid the references to her.
But the really main thing is that it was Lester Hemingway, not Carlos Saker, that I...
met at the New York Public Library.
Okay.
Anyway, as you say, we'll take it in.
Okay, well, so why don't we just, I think, I'd just like to do it as a story almost, and maybe you can just tell me how you came to do this work on Hemingway, and maybe just start where you think it's appropriate, and then if it's okay, I'll ask you a couple questions, but why don't we just start very comfortably with how this project came into being, the inspiration for it.
Probably, because I've always loved to read.
And we were poor, and we couldn't go anywhere on summer vacations or anything, so I always read.
And then in 1953, my mother injured her back, and I had to give up my job.
It was just a clerical job.
I didn't have any secretarial skills.
This was in New York?
No, this was in Kansas City.
Okay, so why don't we...
I've got Tom's letter in front of me, but now you're from Iowa, is that right?
Born in Council Bluffs, Iowa.
Council Bluffs, Iowa.
Right.
And what year was that, if you don't mind telling me?
That was July 27, 1926.
I see.
Okay.
That was 70 years ago.
Wow.
Oh, you've got a birthday coming up.
And so you went to New York, and so you went to high school, and you went to schools.
Let's see.
Now, can I ask you?
Sure.
For the sake of accuracy,
Could you word it with only a high school education?
Here's the situation.
I'd taken a college prep course and made the honor roll one year.
But my father died when I was 16.
I knew there was no way I could go to college.
So then my sister moved to Kansas City to go to the Art Institute, and mother and I joined her, and I transferred to a high school here in Kansas City for my senior year.
And mother became ill.
She had been ill ever since I was three years old, actually.
But she became ill, and then I didn't finish.
And then after the war, I took some classes to make up.
But you were now, at this point, living in Kansas City?
In Kansas City.
And what year did you move there, do you think?
Oh, we moved there in 42 or 43.
1942.
Yeah.
During the war?
I'd say it was 1943.
Okay, so it was during the war.
And so you finished high school in Kansas City.
But I didn't actually ever graduate.
From high school?
Right.
See, I made up... When Mother became ill, I had to leave in my senior year, and then I took classes.
They had classes for ex-servicemen, and I took some of those, but didn't ever actually, you know, let's say I don't have a diploma.
I was at high school in Conflux for three years, and that's what I've always put down on every resume, and it's never really come up.
My sister and I both had jobs that required a college education, and we didn't have college, and people just assumed we did, and then after I moved to New York in 1959, and then I attended lectures at NYU and classes at the New School, so that
And then in 1959, I signed up for Carolyn Gordon's Techniques of Fiction because it included Farewell to Arms.
And I was so looking forward to a discussion about it because I never had an opportunity to discuss his work with anyone.
But at the end of the session on Ford Maddox Ford, she had been his secretary in Paris.
And Ms.
Gordon said instead of Hemingway, we'd spend a second week on four.
So after the class, I told her, you know, of my interest in Hemingway's work, and she said, you can learn all you need to know about Hemingway by reading his books.
You know, I mean, you know, I'd all read him.
I had already read them all.
Tell me a little bit.
You didn't graduate high school, but you had this passion for reading.
Is that right?
That is just about the size of it, yes.
And would you say that your interest primarily was in fiction or in everything?
No, biographies, actually.
I mean, I've read a lot of fiction, goodness me, but I always loved it.
I loved reading biographies.
Well, can you name some of the things without, you don't have to be specific about the titles, but what kinds of lives were you interested in, just lives in general?
Writers' lives.
So how is it that you were attracted?
Now, did you read from the time you were a little girl?
Oh, I did, yes.
And I always, as I said, we were poor, but for Christmas and my birthday, I got a book on each occasion.
Did you ask or were they surprises?
Did you ask for certain books?
No, I had to ask.
So what kinds of things did you ask for?
Do you remember?
Well, like, actually, it was a series of, I know I received that series of Madeleine Brandeis' books, things like Little Tony of Italy and the Little Spanish Fisher, and, oh, it was a whole series.
But...
Now, did your mother have a passion for reading as well?
No.
Not other than the newspaper.
My father, the situation was, my father graduated from college.
Where?
In Northwestern College.
In Chicago.
No, that one's in, I think, Naperville.
Is it in Naperville?
It's not the university.
I see.
It was the college.
And...
And mother was orphaned when she lost her mother when she was nine and her father when she was 12.
And the five children were taken out of school and put to work by an aunt.
Well, anyway.
Well, were they Midwesterners, by the way?
Dad was from Iowa and mother was from St.
Louis.
And then she worked at the telephone company.
through her whole 20s, the whole 19... Mrs. and Council Bluffs.
...in St.
Louis.
I see.
Until she married.
But the thing was, my great-grandfather came over from Darmstadt in... Could you spell that for me?
D-A-R-M.
Uh-huh.
S-T-A-D-T.
Okay, thank you.
Around 1850.
and uh they went to this is maternal grandfather of course no paternal paternal paternal okay yes uh and uh went to uh lancaster pennsylvania and then they went out to indiana and then they took the covered wagon to iowa and and uh ended up on the on the western border there of iowa and um
And then my grandfather was born in Indiana in 1855.
This is, again, your paternal.
This is all paternal.
Right.
But the only point I'm making is that they settled in Iowa, worked awfully hard, grandfather worked awfully hard, and then my father and his older brother,
lost it all in land swindle.
They bought land in Colorado and were swindled out a bit around 1920.
Oh my goodness.
And he was completely defeated.
What kind of work did your grandfather do?
My grandfather had been a farmer and then he owned a butcher shop and a hardware store and a
So he was a businessman.
After the war.
My father was second lieutenant in France during the war.
World War I, we're talking.
Right.
But I'm afraid I'm saying this with a garble.
But the two points are that mother was orphaned young.
Dad had a college education and should have been well off, but instead everything was lost and he was a very defeated man.
Your father worked for the Union Pacific as a railway clerk for 42 cents an hour to support six people, a family of six.
There wasn't that many options.
I mean, reading was something that was available.
Follow?
Yeah.
Did you have a good public library available to you?
Excellent Carnegie Library.
Oh, good.
I'm going to write about Carnegie Libraries in this new book.
That's good.
Oh, good.
Yeah, excellent.
Yes, I started going there very young.
Now, you mentioned this is again in Council Bluffs, right?
Right.
Okay.
And you mentioned a family of six, so you have, I gather, three siblings?
Right.
My older sister, and then there are two boys, and then myself.
Okay.
Could you name the siblings for me?
I know your sister's name, but why don't you tell me anyway?
Oh, and then Gordon and Homer.
Okay.
Homer and Gordon.
It's Marjorie or Margaret?
No, it's Marjorie.
M-A-R-R?
J-O-R-Y.
Okay.
J-O-R-R-I-E.
Okay, good.
See, I have to ask these questions, right?
Sure.
Okay, and where do you fit in here?
I'm the youngest.
You're the youngest.
Right.
And one of my regrets about the bibliography is that when I was in high school, I dropped the Y from my name, and...
I wish now that I had used my middle name, Louise, or else put the Y back on.
Now, why did you drop the Y?
Oh, for rather foolish reasons.
I went in and told the registrar to drop the Y, but my grandfather... Now, the registrar of what now?
At high school.
I see.
And she did it, and the...
My grandfather had set a precedent.
He had dropped the second N on the end of our name.
So that, oh, one of the reasons was that I wanted to use that Greek E at the end of Audrey and have a nice little curling.
When you see my signature, you'll see one of the foolish reasons.
Okay, well, so there was a, you were what age when you did this?
Oh, goodness, I must have been maybe 15.
15?
Yeah.
So what did you think about at the age of 15?
Did you have ideas and dreams?
At 13, I believe I told you, I wanted nothing more than to go to New York to the New York World's Fair.
And after that, it was just a real big thing to go.
This was like 1939, right?
Right.
So that, and then let's see, I think it was 49 when I...
when I did go on a tour that included New York City.
And then, let's see, I visited again in 51, and then moved there in 59.
Did you have a clear idea of what you wanted to do with your life?
I really did.
I wanted to write novels.
You did?
I did.
Mm-hmm.
Uh-huh.
Yeah, I wanted to be a novelist.
Really?
And...
And then when, well, I'll get to that.
But anyway, let's get back to 1953.
That's when.
Ms.
Hanuman, could you just forgive me for just a second?
I want to get a notepad here that I should have.
Oh, absolutely.
I'll be right with you.
I should have a notepad here, and I don't.
So just give me 20 seconds, and I'll be right back.
Okay.
I have to think about something.
When I was in the eighth grade, we had a hobby class, and the council left Montmorelle.
I still got the little clipping.
So my hobby, I had a little notebook where I copied biographies into it.
Well, they'd just be little brief summaries.
And so I'm quoted, this is a great quote, I'm quoted in the paper saying, I simply like to study about others.
You know, I mean, that's kind of... When was this quote made?
That was when I was in the eighth grade.
Really?
Seventh or eighth in the... I see.
I just now thought about that because you asked me how early I... Well...
Go ahead.
Okay, let me just ask a couple questions.
You say that you wanted to be a novelist.
Who were your favorite writers?
Did you have models?
Oh, yes, and they all had three names, and I can't think of any off the top of my head.
All of those... Oh, golly, I'd have to think of that.
If you ask me my favorite novelist...
Today, Jane Austen has been for over 20 years.
But when you went to the library and you brought home books, you brought home a lot of novels?
Probably.
Probably a lot of fiction, a lot of biographies, history.
I've always
I've always been enlisted in history, especially the Regency.
But no, that wasn't a billion counts of love.
Now, did you read late at night?
No, that wasn't until Kansas City then.
Okay, but did you read late at night?
Did you kind of stay awake or even as a little girl?
I loved it very much.
I stand up to bed pretty early.
No, probably weekends and vacation.
I read my way through summer vacations, let's put it that way.
You read your way.
Okay, so now let's kind of come a little closer now to the Hemingway Project, if we can.
So you're in New York.
You finally moved to the... No, not yet.
You're too quick.
Okay.
You've jumped ahead.
Then in 1953, and my mother injured her back, and that's when I had to give up my job, and I was home for over five years, and that's when it all started.
This is now in Kansas City.
It was in Kansas City.
And the job you had to give up once again was?
Oh, it was a clerical job at...
I was at Kansas City Life then.
No, I was at American Herford Association.
And this is in Kansas City?
Right.
Uh-huh.
Okay, it's like a secretarial job, right?
It's like a secretarial job?
No, no.
Strictly clerical.
I didn't have any secretarial skills.
I've always had clerical.
I've had like a data writer at Kansas City Life Insurance Company.
This was keeping records of Herford's...
I had to name them sometimes, just, you know, cattle records.
And then... Cattle records?
Uh-huh.
That's great.
Okay.
And then you'd have to name them, and that was fun.
If the cattle breeder hadn't, you know, if he hadn't named them, and then they came down through a line.
But anyway, and even when I went to New York at American Heritage, my first job there, see, it was just, it was simply clerical at a book club.
I was at American Heritage in New York, right?
And what year was that, 53?
No, no.
59?
Yeah, 59.
Okay.
Okay, so again, let's go back for the five years.
In 53 then.
And then so while my sister supported us, I took care of mothers, you know, cared for mothers.
And then instead of just continuing on random reading, like I'd always done,
Well, I began reading the books.
I found this book's list of 100 great books.
And I'd only read... I don't know how many of them I'd read.
But when it came to Farewell to Arm, instead of continuing the list, I began reading everything about Hemingway.
I just went on a tangent.
Everything in the Kansas City Library, and they borrowed books for me from the Interlibrary Loan Service.
And then at some...
At the time, because there wasn't one, I decided to do a biography.
You decided to write a biography?
To write a biography of Hemingway.
You weren't intimidated by the enormity of how formidable this might be?
You know, what Jerry Frank says in here,
I was just reading what I told him, and it was certainly the truth.
I told him, quote, oh, I thought it would be a great idea, and I started to work on it.
However, I found myself writing little transitional sentences linking great chunks of Hemingway, and for some reason, the transitional passages didn't come up for what he said.
You'll see it.
It didn't come up to Hemingway's writing, so I abandoned that.
You abandoned the biography.
How were you going to get the details of his life?
Had you given that any thought?
I was allowed access to the Kansas City Stars file.
Really?
So you actually did kind of proceed with it a little bit.
They're always so proud that he had that apprenticeship on their paper in 1917, 1918.
And then when I would take my mother to visit in St.
Louis, then I...
had access to the Post-Dispatch and the Globe Center.
So you actually did kind of take some steps then, didn't you?
I, let's say that I, and then any articles, any, everything by and, oh, and see what I, it was really brilliant what I was doing because I was taking all of the biographical
information from like Green Hills of Africa and the short stories and
You know, then, as I say, but the transitional passages fell, they were completely inadequate.
Well, let's go, this was a book called The 100 Great Books, or The 100, what are... A list of 100 great books.
Do you remember whose list it was, or was it just a list?
No, I really don't.
I had a note someplace that I got a quarter of the way through it, but... But it was a list.
Was it a book, or was it just a list that you'd read someplace?
You don't remember whether or not it was in a book?
I don't know if it was in Reader's Digest.
I really don't remember.
It might have been Reader's Digest?
I mean, you're saying it might have been.
It might have been.
And these were not summaries of the books.
Oh, no, it was just a list.
A list of the titles.
So what prompted you to pause at Hemingway?
Oh, once I had read A Farewell to Arms.
No one else.
Well, were you reading all the books on this list?
I was going through.
And you were going to attempt to read all of them, right?
Oh, absolutely.
And was this kind of like an education you were giving yourself, do you think?
I think very much so.
Very much so.
Because I don't think anyone else has ever understood this, but I think that what drew me to Hemingway's writing
was that he actually was a teacher.
Like, one of my great favorites is Big Two-Hearted River.
And he went into detail about fishing.
He went into detail about the bullfights.
He was teaching you all the time in his books.
And I needed that.
So that, well, anyway.
What do you mean, I needed that?
Well, I...
I should have gone to college.
I should have gone, I should have, I would have loved, I always loved school.
I was on an honor roll one year.
I was, you know, I missed a lot of school all through my grade school.
I had to stay home with Mother, but... Would you feel, if I were to say, do you feel that this is one of the great omissions in your life, is that you weren't able to study as much as you might like to have?
Oh, I regret it very much that it wasn't a time when, like my grandniece, she has this marvelous scholarship at William Woods College here in Missouri on her softball.
She is a great little pitcher, and the team ranks number five in the nation.
Wow.
And, I mean, I just think that's marvelous, you know, to have...
to have that chance for her to go to school with a scholarship like that.
But anyway, the opportunity wasn't there, and so I did what I could.
Well, so now you were reading this list of the 100 great books.
You came across Hemingway,
And you became absorbed in Hemingway, apparently.
That is a good, that's the right word, yes.
And now you were not only reading everything he had written, but I would assume everything you could read about him, is that correct?
That is, right.
And so this is still while you're back home in Kansas City, right?
Right.
And then I went up to Oak Park, made a couple trips up to Oak Park,
in 1953, 1954.
And then in 1955, I made the first day of my first research trip to New York.
in the reading room of the New York Public Library, and I recognized the man sitting across the table from me as Hemingway's brother, Lester.
Come on.
Now, I mean, that is one coincidence.
Well, how did you know it was he?
Well, I passed him a note, asking him if he was who I thought he was, and he stood up, and he was a very big man, and he said it right out loud, and I, of course, at the time, I whispered in libraries,
And he says, where the hell did I meet you?
So I went around the table and told him I recognized him from the photo.
The photo was on the dust jacket of his novel, The Sound of the Trumpet.
So he was working under a deadline.
And so he said that he could give me an hour at lunch, you know, later in the book.
Now, his picture was on the dust check of the what book?
Oh, his novel, The Sound of the Trumpet.
This is Hemingway's brother wrote a novel?
This is Lester Hemingway.
See, I didn't know this.
Yeah.
So you weren't only interested just in Ernest, you were interested in... Well, no, see, The Sound of the Trumpet was a World War II novel, and Ernest was one of the main characters.
But, of course, under another name.
But, oh, and it was so maddening because I would ask Les, I had a whole lot of questions.
I would ask him, what did he mean by this, you know, or that?
Well, so, okay, so this is the first day you go to New York.
Right, I go to the first day of my, right.
And now we're up to 1959?
No, no, this is 1955.
So this is just a trip.
A research trip, yeah.
And so you're about, let me just figure here, you're about 28 years old about this time, right?
26, 27.
Let's see, is that right?
Let's see, in 56 I would be... Close to 30, yeah.
Wait a minute.
Oh, goodness, isn't that terrible?
Uh...
Oh, I was close to 30, yeah.
Oh, yeah, sure, because this is 55.
Okay, so now you were just going on a trip, right?
On the research.
Now your sister was there already, right?
Oh, no, no.
So she didn't come until after I moved.
I see.
Okay, so you went, and how long did you make this trip for?
See, when she would give up her vacation days to stay with Mother so I could make these trips,
So I probably stayed four or five days.
And you were actually thinking still about doing a biography.
Right, right.
Okay.
And what did you think that you'd find in New York?
What kinds of material?
Everything that I couldn't find at the Kansas City Library.
But like in terms of what?
Published material or what?
Just...
A biography, of course, of the details of the life.
See, every book, like Philip Young's book, had he let that come out yet?
I'm not sure.
But anyway, every book had footnotes, and I have followed up footnotes all my life.
I'm still doing it.
But, oh yes, I knew there would be a great deal.
in New York to check.
So you went to New York and you went to the New York Public Library.
That's wonderful.
What amazes me is that you're traveling all the way from Kansas City to New York to go to the public library.
Well, not really.
I mean, it...
I mean, think what a magnificent library is.
Oh, no, this is great.
You see, I'm writing about libraries in this new book.
Remember, I went to over, or nearly 20 libraries while I was working on it, and I did a, oh, my, I did an enormous amount at the New York Public Library, and then, of course, a lot at the Library of Congress.
I made many trips down there.
It's just that no library has everything, and...
So you've been working on this now for three, four, five years, right, at this particular point?
No, no, this was 55.
I'd only been on it for about two years.
And you'd already been to about 20 libraries?
No, no, no, no.
No, no, that's... Okay.
See, that's where I misspeak.
As I said in my presence to the bibliography, doing the bibliography I worked in at...
I made nearly 20 research trips and worked at over 40 libraries.
I see, okay, okay.
But no, at this point, I'd only gone up to Chicago, and the library's there, and I didn't go to Newberry until later Chicago trips.
I'd been researched, by 55, I'd been to Oak Park and Chicago twice, and then I went
to New York.
And were you confident that you were getting enough material to start writing?
Not really.
I was just kind of wanting to, I couldn't get enough.
I kept, you know, just reading more and more.
But anyway, to get back to Les, he was working under a deadline and he was going to give me an hour later in the week.
And so he took me to Costello's on 3rd Avenue to show me the shillelagh behind the bar that Hemingway broke over his head to win a bet with John O'Hara.
Oh, I think that's so foolish.
And anyway, so then we talked the whole afternoon, and he complimented me in saying that I knew more about Hemingway than any other living person.
But he gave me some excellent leads to articles and gave me more in subsequent, you know, when we corresponded.
Was he nice to you?
Oh, he was very nice.
Did you ask if you might at some point be able to meet with Ernest?
Oh, he wanted me to fly right down to Cuba and meet Ernest, and it would have been a big, big mistake.
No, no.
Did you ever meet Ernest?
Never did.
Did you ever write him?
Wrote once, never received a reply.
So this project was done totally without either his knowledge or his approbation, right?
Oh, absolutely.
Were you a little shy, you think, about actually trying to get in touch with him?
Oh, very much so.
Very much so.
And I just could not believe that he was going to welcome with open arms someone without a college.
Of course, he didn't have a college degree himself, but someone without college who was going to do this work.
biography of him.
I mean, it just isn't realistic.
So the idea of a bibliography still hadn't nucleated drag yet, right?
No, it hadn't.
But now you've met his brother, and you corresponded with the brother.
Uh-huh.
And would you think if that were Ernest sitting at the table in New York, do you think you'd have passed a note to him?
Oh, I absolutely would have.
Oh, yes.
Oh, yes, yes.
I wouldn't pass up the opportunity.
It's just that... And then I had read enough to know that, I mean, I have never been one to...
I don't drink or smoke, and I really have very low tolerance for drunkenness.
I mean, I've never been an admirer of Fitzgerald after reading that about kicking the tray out of the waiter's hand and Hemingway shooting into that toilet at the Ritz in Paris.
I mean, that kind of thing.
Yeah.
but now Hemingway was really quite the rebel rouser oh yes did this diminish him at all in your estimation no because see it was his writing his writing was really so important to me that and yet of course as I said the biography was only because it annoyed me that there wasn't one and
And there should, you know, I felt like, well, then, you know, someone should do a biography.
But even, see, what I was doing, I was just taking large chunks of his writing and putting them in.
I mean, I wasn't...
actually writing about him.
And you weren't interviewing him, but were you trying to interview any other people who might have known him?
No, I really wasn't.
So I guess you kind of realized you really weren't going to do a biography.
No, no.
I think it involved as ambitious as it is the things that you did.
Clearly, there was a lot more that you weren't going to
No, I realized it was too ambitious a project.
You know, well, let's say by 1957 or 8, but that didn't stop me from continuing to do research.
So then when I did move to New York in 1959, and I had abandoned the idea of doing the biography, then I took this note, as I told you, it was a 6x9 note type, but 6x9.
containing all my source material that I'd consulted in the five previous years.
So I took that to Scribner's, and Harry Bragg was ever so nice, but he told me that Hemingway was absolutely against the bibliography being published during his lifetime.
So then in 1961, after his suicide,
I wrote to Mr. Bragg and I offered the information I had compiled to whoever would be doing a bibliography, you know, and I would have been happy for someone to use it.
So then he informed me that no one was working on one.
So you can imagine that.
what my reaction was to that.
What was your reaction?
No one else is doing it.
Yeah.
So then I... So did you at this point perceive an opportunity?
I did indeed.
Yes, that's a good way to put it.
And I spent all of 1962, the rest of 61 and all of 1962, I used up my savings and borrowed from my sister, who I later repaid, and worked on the bibliography.
And then in February of 63, I got the job as indexer with Sweets Architectural and Industrial Catalogs, a division of Grand Hill.
And then, can I tell you this?
Incidentally, Malcolm Cowley worked for Sweets.
It was probably 30 years earlier.
And in one of his memoirs, he told how he was able to turn his attention to literary matters after the catalogs went to the printers in July...
And that's just what I was able to obtain unpaid leaves of the absence for research trips after the catalogs went to the posters.
It was a perfect job because it was almost like, you know, with school, and then you have your couple of months there summer vacation.
So that I was able to, and then, and that's when I made a number of trips.
And then in 1963, I took the enlarged
The Godfrey, the Scribner's, and with my permission, which you may believe was gladly given, they sent it to Carlos Baker.
And then Miriam Brokaw at the Princeton University Press wrote me and we set up an appointment.
And they indicated their interest.
So you sent it to Baker to help him with the preparation of his biography or just for him to look at?
No, not at all.
I took it to Scribman and they asked him permission to send it to Carlos Baker.
And then he, you know, because they wanted his, see, he had done those checklists in his book.
What's his book about Hemingway?
Well, it says he did the biography, right?
Not the biography, but his books.
You know, he did his...
Where's Hemingway?
Naturally, I'm looking in the supplement instead of the biography.
Well, let's not worry about that.
At this point, was the bibliography pretty well complete?
I'm held up.
Oh, Hemingway, the writer is artist that went into so many editions.
You know, and then, and, and, uh, Thomas Baker had the, uh, the checklist, uh, um, checklist in that.
And of course, I, every, all of those items, I, you know, would then go to the library and look up and, and, uh, all of the, uh, and then of course all the book reviews I would, you know, at, at, at, um, New York Public Library.
I'd, I'd even, McGraw Hill had that big green building there at 8th Avenue and 42nd Street.
and at noon i would go i would go up i would walk up to the to the uh to the library spend a half an hour and uh or so and and walk back i mean it just uh uh i you know i just i
You know, I think I've got all this index and having the time to find.
Now, what are you referring to just out of curiosity right now?
My 12 pages of notes.
I see.
I indexed them so that naturally I indexed them so I could find everything.
Notes of what?
I told my sister I feel like I've been cramming for an exam for two and a half days.
Really?
I've been writing all these notes, but... Okay, let's not worry about Carlos Baker.
We can go back to that.
Is he still alive?
No, no.
He passed away.
Uh-huh.
But, you know, I'm not a good person to ask who's alive and who isn't.
I simply haven't kept track of...
of all of that.
Who would you say is the leading Hemingway scholar now?
See, now again, I can't tell you that.
Of course, Carlos was, and of course, William White was certainly very much so.
I went out to Michigan to see his extensive collection, and at Suffer, his wife asked him why he wasn't doing the Hemingway bibliography.
What did he say?
And he had planned to when he came back from World War II.
But it was simply a case where other things came up and he didn't do it.
What did you see as the...
the importance, the significance of a bibliography.
Maybe we can talk a little bit about the process and what a bibliography is and how you visualized it.
I mean, some people could say a bibliography is a list of all the books written by a writer, right?
But it goes much deeper than that.
And you had A, B, C, D, E items.
You had all these different kinds of categories that you established.
Let's just start, you know.
Now, think of all the, not all of them, there hasn't been that many, but the book dealers who have written me and thanked me for doing it, that I've made their job so much.
I know, I know, but you're jumping ahead to the conclusion, though.
I'm just wondering about, you know.
Because this is a lot of work.
I mean, were you looking at this as a hobby or was it like a mission?
Was it something that you thought might actually be a definition of a life's work?
Let's put it, I always considered the bibliography a labor of love and the supplement just a labor.
Just a labor for the supplement?
Pardon?
The bibliography was a labor of love and the supplement was... The supplement was just pure labor.
By that time, I had this demanding job at McGraw Hill, and it was just very hard work.
So you didn't enjoy it that much?
Not the supplement.
Accepting that, I take that back, I was delighted to have a chance to list, oh, I had missed some very important items, and to have a chance to list, you know, my omissions.
And then, again, you can imagine how much I enjoyed excerpting, you know, making small excerpts of the reviews.
I mean, that's a delightful task to...
to do that.
It took quite a toll on the health.
Is that right?
Doing the supplements.
Really?
Yes, it really did.
In what respect?
Were you ill?
Just pretty drained.
Mm-hmm.
I know at the time... Let me find something here.
Roughly.
Eight, seven.
Oh, yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
Now, here's what I... No, my thoughts the other day was that between 1963 and 1966, and again in the early 1970s,
With only minimal exaggeration, I devoted every lunch hour, evening, weekend, holiday, and most of my vacation days to working on the bibliography and then later the supplement.
Wow.
I was my own researcher, correspondence secretary, manuscript typist, indexer, proof feeder.
I mean, it annoys me that I can't find any record of how large the manuscript was.
I think it was at least 900 pages, it would be over 1,000.
And can you believe it?
Princeton University Press, they wanted to do it offset.
They wanted a perfectly timed manuscript that they had done, and they had given me a copy to use it properly.
You know, if I wanted to use it as a guide of Harvey's Ford Maddox Ford bibliography, which had been done offset, but sometimes...